This is a d3.js illustration of the difference between normal and fat-tailed distributions.

Normal vs Fat-Tailed

A population or process that follows a normal distribution varies a lot in the neighborhood of its average, but produces few examples beyond two standard deviations from the average. 

A fat-tailed distribution looks normal but has thicker 'tails' (the parts far away from the average), meaning a higher chance of huge deviations.

Normal distributions are common in biology. Human height (by sex), for example, follows a normal distribution: men average 5' 10," and their population has a standard deviation of 4". That means the chance of a man exceeding eight feet (6.5 standard deviations from the average) is astronomically small. Among the billions of men ever measured, only about 20 exceeded eight feet. 

Fat-tailed distributions are common in society. Look how the top three highest-grossing documentaries earned many times what the others did. If earnings were normal, these films would be like thirty-foot men.

Don't Get Confused

Fat tails don't mean more variance; just weird variance. For a given variance, fat tails mean a higher chance of extreme deviations but a lower chance of medium ones. To paraphrase Nicholas Nassim Taleb (author of The Black Swan):

"I ask people: 'The normal distribution spends 68.2% of the time within one standard deviation of its mean.' In finance, which has fat tails, how much time do stocks spend within one standard deviation?' egPople say, 'Less than 68.2%, because there are more deviations in fat-tailed things!' They're wrong: stock prices spend between 78% and 98% of their time within one standard deviation of their averages."

Illustration

Both distributions below have variance measures of one, but the left is fat-tailed and the right is normal. With the slider, you can change the fat-tailedness of the left (measured as its 'kurtosis') while keeping its variance at one. As you fatten the tails, the middle part has to bunch up to keep a lid on variance.

The plots show time-series sampled from the histograms. Look at how the fat-tailed time series spends more time than the normal in the shaded, one-standard deviation region.

Consequence

Let's say you're a bank. People deposit their money, and you use it to buy bets. Now, let's say you think the outcomes of the bets are normal, but they're secretly fat-tailed. In this case, 90% of the time your bet works, but sometimes it doesn't, and when you're wrong you'll be very, very wrong. 

If you lose too much money at once, depositors will want their money back right away (like at the end of 'It's A Wonderful Life'). Then the government has a choice: (a) use tax money to calm depositors or (b) let depositors lose their savings. If your bank has trillions in deposits, then (b) causes recession. The government loses so much money in a recession (from low taxes) and its people hurt so badly (from getting fired and losing their savings) that only a very unusual government would choose (b). 

 Banks don't literally bet deposits. But they do complicated things similar to betting, so the lesson stands: when banks fudge probabilities, they waste taxes.

 http://www.rff.org/RFF/Documents/RFF-DP-11-19-REV.pdf